Lawmakers are expected to vote on the plan by the end of 2025.

Armin Papperger said Chancellor Friedrich Merz's aim to boost the Bundeswehr was "realistic" and he told the BBC that "clear decisions" were coming from government.

Earlier this year German defence chief Gen Carsten Breuer warned that the Western Nato alliance had to prepare for a possible Russian attack within four years.

Mr Papperger said he had "no glass ball" about the future but agreed Germany had to be "ready in '29".

When they formed a coalition earlier this year, Merz's conservative CDU/CSU and the centre-left Social Democrat SPD agreed to re-introduce military service which would be voluntary "to start with".

The Bundeswehr currently has around 182,000 troops. The new military service model aims to increase that number by 20,000 over the next year, rising to between 255,000 and 260,000 over the next 10 years, supplemented by approximately 200,000 reservists.

From next year, all 18-year-old men and women will be sent a questionnaire to assess their interest and willingness to join the armed forces. It will be mandatory for men and voluntary for women.

From July 2027 all men aged 18 will also have to take a medical exam to assess their fitness for duty.

If the government's targets are not met, a form of compulsory enlistment could be considered by parliament. If war were to break out, the military would be able to draw on the questionnaires and medical exams for potential recruits.

Some within Germany's political left remain deeply opposed to mandatory service.

Many young Germans are wary and a significant majority oppose it. A recent Forsa survey for Stern magazine suggested while just over half of respondents favoured compulsory service, opposition rose to 63% among 18- to 29-year-olds.

"I don't want to go to war because I don't want to die or I don't want to be shot at," said Jimi, a 17-year-old student from Berlin, who attended an anti-conscription protest outside the Bundestag earlier this week. "I also don't want to shoot people."

An attack against Germany was an "unlikely and abstract scenario" that the government was using to legitimise "stealing millions of young people's right to decide what they should be doing", he said.

Meanwhile, 21-year-old Jason signed up as new Bundeswehr recruit earlier this year because of the current "security situation".

"I wanted to contribute to defend peace, to defend democracy if the worst happens," he said. By joining up he felt he was "giving back to society" but also believed in the deterrent potential of the army, "so potential enemies don't even think about attacking you".